# 1Q60.01 
  # Stable Wheel 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show how a rolling bicycle wheel "organizes" its stability.    
  
## Subjects   
 1Q60 (Rotational Stability)   
  
## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
      
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  Small bicycle wheel; diam. = 40cm (or any other wheel or disc).
     
  
## Presentation   
 • Place the wheel upright on the floor. On release it falls down immediately. • Then the wheel is released while turning. It rolls over the floor and remains upright for a much longer time. The second observation made is that it will follow a curve when it starts falling down. Also notice that the curve it makes, is into the direction of the "falling-down" (see Figure1).   
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
     
  
## Presentation   
 • Place the wheel upright on the floor. On release it falls down immediately. • Then the wheel is released while turning. It rolls over the floor and remains upright for a much longer time. The second observation made is that it will follow a curve when it starts falling down. Also notice that the curve it makes, is into the direction of the "falling-down" (see Figure1).  Figure 1   
  
## Explanation   
 Figure2A shows the wheel turning. The rotation is indicated by means of the vector w. Due to some disturbance, the wheel inclines due to gravity: a torque (t) is acting on the wheel (see Figure2B).    
```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_2.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
 Due to this torque the direction of the vector w is changed: w is changed into the    direction of t (see figure2C), so the wheel will make a curve while rolling. This continues because the vectors w and t remain perpendicular to each other. Also can be seen now that the larger the inclination, the sharper the curve it will make since the vector r increases, making t larger.   