# 4B70.02 
  # Fire-Pump 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show that fast compression is accompanied by a considerable raise in temperature.    
  
## Subjects   
 4B70 (Adiabatic Processes)   
  
## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
     
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  Closed tube, fitted with plunger. 
 *  Pyroxyl wire.
      
  
## Presentation   
 Small pieces of pyroxyl are put in the tube. The plunger is fitted into the tube and then pushed down rapidly. The pyroxyl lights and burns with a flash (see DiagramB). This points out to a steep increase in temperature.    
  
## Explanation   
 In general the process of the gas is polytropic, so: npV= constant. In this demonstration the air in the closed tube is compressed rapidly, so during this action there is almost no heat exchanged with the surroundings. Such a process is performed adiabatically, and nγ=, giving pVγ= constant. Rewriting this in terms of temperature gives: 1TVγ−= constant and so: 11212VTTVγ−⎛⎞=⎜⎟⎝⎠. When the compression ratio 12VV⎛⎞⎜⎟⎝⎠is around 6 and using air (γ=1.4) we have: T2=60.4.T1=2T1. So starting at room temperature (T1=300K), the air should heat up to around 600K (327oC)!    
  
## Remarks   
 
 *  Hold the tube firmly, so that when you press the plunger downwards forcefully the tube doesn't topple and break. We prevent toppling by standing on the foot of the construction. 
 *  When the flash occurs you can feel also the rise in pressure (1.41212612VppbarVγ⎛⎞===⎜⎟⎝⎠). 
 *  We use pyroxyl wire, but you can also use small pieces of paper and/or the scrapings of a match. But do not use too much; more material means a higher heat capacity and as a consequence a lower temperature-rise of that material.
   
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 279-281. 
 *  Meiners,H., Physics demonstration experiments, part 2, pag. 800. 
 *  Wolfson, R., Essential University Physics, pag. 297-299.
  