
```{figure} /figures/busy.png
---
width: 35%
align: right
```
# 1H10.06 
  # Recoil of a Water Jet 
   Recoil of a water-jet   
  
## Aim   
 To show an example of Newton's third law.    
  
## Subjects   
 1H10 (Action and Reaction) 1N22 (Rockets)   
  
## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
      
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  T-tube, ˘ 10 
 *  rubber hose (about 2 meters) 
 *  faucet 
 *  tray to catch the water   Recoil of a water-jet
    
  
## Presentation   
 The rubber hose with T-tube hangs vertically down. Opening the faucet makes the T-tube move away.    
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
   Recoil of a water-jet    
  
## Presentation   
 The rubber hose with T-tube hangs vertically down. Opening the faucet makes the T-tube move away.    When a plate is held in the water-jet nothing changes. When the plate is fixed to the T-tube the hose stays vertically in its position.    
  
## Explanation   
 In order to convert a downward waterflow into a sideways waterflow, the T-tube has to exert a force on the water. The reaction to this force is responsible for the recoil to the other side. When a plate is placed in the outcoming waterstream, it also exerts a force on the plate. When this plate is fixed to the T-tube, these two forces cancel, so there is no recoil    
  
## Remarks   
 This demonstration can be performed by the students themselves, by giving each of them a flexible soda straw, giving it a 90° bend (Figure 1).   
```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_2.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
 Blowing hard in the long part of the straw, the free end recoils. The no-recoil can be observed when a small plastic bag is attached at the end of the straw.    
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Friedrich, Artur, Handbuch der experimentellen Schulphysik, part 2, Mechanik der festen Körper, pag. 169 
 *  Ehrlich, R., Why Toast Lands Jelly-Side Down: Zen and the Art of Physics Demonstrations, pag. 34 
 *  Ehrlich, Robert, Turning the World Inside Out and 174 Other Simple Physics Demonstrations, pag. 35
  