
```{figure} /figures/busy.png
---
width: 35%
align: right
```
# 5D20.02 
  # Negative Temperature Coefficient 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show how the resistance of a semiconductor (P-Ge) depends on temperature.    
  
## Subjects   
 5D20 (Resistivity and Temperature)   
  
## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
      
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  Bar of P-Ge 
 *  Power supply 
 *  Current meter with large display 
 *  Gasflame
       
  
## Presentation   
 Set the Ammeter at a 1A-scale. The voltage of the power supply is raised until a current of about 0.05 A flows in the circuit. The bar of P-Ge is heated by the gasflame and soon the current rises to a much higher value. After a short time of heating the gasflame can be removed and the current continues to rise, faster and faster, only limited by the powersupply.    
  
## Explanation   
 The resistance of a semiconductor drops with temperature because at a higher temperature there are more free charge-carriers in it. The current flowing in the material heats it up:2elVPR= The heat leaving the piece of material is proportional to DT: outPT(cid:181)D (Newton cooling). When Pout=Pel. there will be thermal equilibrium and the temperature is constant. Reaching such an equilibrium takes some time. In this demonstration R lowers due to a rise in temperature and so Pel. rises due to a rise in temperature. When this rise is faster than the rise of Pout an ever faster rising of DT (like an avalanche) will result.   