# 6D10.03 
  # Lloyds Mirror 
    Title: Lloyds mirror    
  
## Aim   
 To show the interference of two coherent beams of light.    
  
## Subjects   
 6D10 (Interference From Two Sources)   
  
## Diagram   
 Diagram   
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  Laser 
 *  Simple lens (we use +10 mm) 
 *  Surface mirror 
 *  White screen/wall
     
  
## Presentation   
 The room is darkened and the laser is switched on. By means of the +10 mm-lens an illuminated disk is projected on the white screen. The surface mirror is placed parallel to the diverging light beam (see figure 1)     
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
     
  
## Presentation   
 The room is darkened and the laser is switched on. By means of the +10 mm-lens an illuminated disk is projected on the white screen. The surface mirror is placed parallel to the diverging light beam (see figure 1)     Figure 1 Figure 2  and then turned just a little, so that the outer rays of the beam are reflected (see figure 2). In the light spot on the wall the fringes are visible now.    
  
## Explanation   
 A portion of the wavefront is reflected from S (see figure 3).     
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
 The other portion proceeds directly to the screen. Interference occurs in the region where the two portions are superimposed S and its mirrorimage S1 can be considered as separate coherent sources, placed a distance a apart. Then the separation (Dy) between the fringes is given bysyalD» (s being the distance between the plane of the two sources and the screen).    
  
## Remarks   
 In the demonstration the distance between the fringes can be enlarged by placing the screen not perpendicular but more parallel to the beam.    
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Hecht, Eugene, Optics, pag. 391-392 
 *  Leybold-Heraeus, Physikalische Handblätter, pag. DK 535.412;b
  