
```{figure} /figures/busy.png
---
width: 35%
align: right
```
# 5K30.02 
  # Transformer 
    
  
## Aim   
 To verify the relationship between the voltages and the number of turns in the coils.    
  
## Subjects   
 5K30 (Transformers)   
  
## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
     
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  220V mains safetyswitchbox (we use Leybold 50206). 
 *  U-core with bar and clamping device. 
 *  Coil, n=500. 
 *  Multiscale voltmeter with large display. 
 *  Long wire.   
  
## Safety   
 
 *  Applying the 220V mains is done via a safety switchbox that switches both connectors ON/OFF. When ON, a red light appears on the box; when OFF a green light shows, indicating that it is safe to manipulate the circuit.
     
  
## Presentation   
 The demonstration is set up as shown in Diagram and Figure 1.     
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
     
  
## Presentation   
 The demonstration is set up as shown in Diagram and Figure 1.    Figure 1  The 220V is switched on and the students can read on the V-meter that in the loop around the core a voltage of around .4V is induced. Then the demonstrator makes the wire go round the core in two loops. Again the induced voltage is read and a doubling is observed. Then make the wire go round the core three times (see Figure2). And so on, as long as the length of the wire enables it.    
```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_2.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
 Clearly the proportionality between induced voltage and the number of turns is observed.    
  
## Explanation   
 When an alternating voltage (Ep) is applied across the primary coil of a transformer and there is no flux leakage, then the emf induced in the secondary coil is given by: ssppnEEn. This demonstration verifies this: - 1 turn: Es=1/500(220)=.44V. - 2 turns: Es=2/500(220)=.88V. - Etc.    
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 527-529
  