
```{figure} /figures/busy.png
---
width: 35%
align: right
```
# 1E20.03 
  # Coriolis (1b) 
 Coriolis (1b)   
  
## Aim   
 To show the effect on an object moving with constant velocity in a rotating reference frame.    
  
## Subjects   
 1E20 (Rotating Reference Frames) 1E30 (Coriolis Effect)   
  
## Diagram   
  camera fixed to rotating platform rotating platform   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
    
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  Rotating platform. 
 *  Board, with square grid (). 21010cm
 *  Tripod with camera fixed to rotating platform. 
 *  Large tripod to hold cables to the camera (see Diagram). 
 *  Clamping material.   
  
## Safety   
 
 *  Take care not to make too many rotations into one direction, because then the cables to the camera twist too much.. Coriolis (1b)
    
  
## Presentation   
 This demonstration is equal to “Coriolis 1a” in this database. The difference is that now the camera presents directly to the audience what is observed on the rotating platform. Again show that the steel ball follows a straight line in the lecturehall’s frame of reference, while the camera shows a curved path. Rotate the platform in both directions.   
  
## Explanation   
 corF2corFmv. vand are continuously perpendicular to each other. Figure 1 shows    
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
 the direction of the resulting Fcor . So Fcor points as seen from vcontinuously to the left, giving m  a counter clockwise path. When the platform rotates into the other direction, in Figure 1 will point upward and the resulting  will be the opposite direction. corF   
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 182 
 *  McComb,W.D., Dynamics and Relativity, pag. 137-145 
 *  Roest, R., Inleiding Mechanica, pag. 197-202, 205-210
  