# 1N10.03 
  # Boomerang Ball (2) 
 Boomerang ball (2)   
  
## Aim   
 The concept of impulse explains this very peculiar behavior of a bouncing ball.    
  
## Subjects   
 1K10 (Dynamic Torque) 1N10 (Impulse and Thrust)   
  
## Diagram   
    
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
    
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  Superball. 
 *  Table.   
  
## Safety   
 
 *  A superball can jump into many unexpected directions, so mind vulnerable objects in the neighborhood. Boomerang ball (2)
    
  
## Presentation   
 The table is positioned as shown in Diagram. The ball is thrown as shown. The ball bounces to a fro.    
  
## Explanation   
 As a basis to explanation see the demonstration "Boomerang ball (1)" in this database. Using a large basketball thrown against the floor and then bouncing against a vertical wall, shows that after hitting the vertical wall the basketball still rotates clockwise. Figure 1A shows this.    
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
 Boomerang ball (2) (The effect of the friction force FR in Q is not that large as that of FR in P, since the ball approaches the vertical wall with hpand this momentum is smaller than vpin P.) Having hit the vertical wall the ball climbs steep (see Figure 1A). A parabola-trajectory follows. On hitting the floor in R, the friction force is directed to the right (Figure 1B). The impulse rFdtis large enough to make the component hpchange direction and RMrFis inducing a counter clockwise rotation. It bounces towards S and again FR is directed to the inner side of the parabola, making the component hpreverse direction and RMrFinducing clockwise rotation. And so on.    
  
## Remarks   
 
 *  Practicing this demonstration against a real wall will learn that this part of the demonstration can also be appreciated on its own. Having the right speed and right angle, a very high climbing ball will be the result of your practicing. Figure 1A shows the explanation of this phenomenon: After bouncing at Q, vp has a very high value. 
 *  A nice variation to this demonstration is the "drunken student" (sorry, "drunken sailor"). To throw a ball that follows such a staggering trajectory, see Figure 2.    
```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_2.png  
---  
caption  
```
 
   
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Walker, J., Roundabout, the Physics of Rotation in the Everyday World, pag. 8-12. 
 *  American Journal of Physics, pag. 875-883 (Vol. 72-7; 2004).
  