
```{figure} /figures/busy.png
---
width: 35%
align: right
```
# 6D30.02 
  # Newton's Rings (2) 
 Newton's rings (2)   
  
## Aim   
 To show Newton's rings, and that its colorsequence is not a rainbow.    
  
## Subjects   
 6D30 (Thin Films)   
  
## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
     
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  Newton's rings apparatus (convex lens pressed against flat glass plate (Duboscq); pressure can be adjusted by screws in the ring-mount). 
 *  Hg-lamp, with power-unit. 
 *  Objective lens. 
 *  Two lenses f=150mm/diam.=70mm. 
 *  Flat surface mirror. 
 *  Black screen. Newton's rings (2)   
  
## Safety   
 
 *  The Hg-lamp needs some time to come to its full light intensity. It also becomes very hot! Do not touch it.
   
  
## Presentation   
 Set up the equipment as shown in Diagram. Images are projected on the wall (see Figure 1A).     
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
 After the lamp is heated up, situation of Diagram A is presented to the students, to indicate that there will be a reflected and a transmitted beam of light. Then the transmitted beam is blocked (black screen) and using the mirror and a +150mm-lens the reflection image is projected (Diagram B). Clearly Newton's rings are observed. Observe the central dark spot (see also: Remarks) observe the colored rings, the color-sequence and observe the diminishing distance between the rings when moving away from the centre. Changing the pressure on the Newton's rings apparatus will change/move the reflected image. Then the black screen is removed and using the second +150mm-lens the transmitted image is projected next to the reflected image (see Diagram C and Figure 1). It is clearly visible that both images are complementary. At first glance, the observed colors look rainbowlike, but careful observation shows that it differs from a rainbow (see Figure 2; reality is much better than this photograph).  Newton's rings (2)   
```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_2.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
 Observing the reflected image shows, when moving away from the central dark spot, at first a rainbow, but already in the next ring the color purple appears; in the next rings white and orange are dominating; around ring 10 there is a repeating sequence of blue and orange and around ring 16 repeating bands of dark violet and yellowish rings are visible giving form a distance the impression of a continuity of black and white fringes.    
  
## Explanation   
 See Figure1 B. Looking at the two red rays drawn in this figure, we see that it is the height d that introduces the phasedifference. d=R-(R2-x2)1/2. The two rays, one reflecting from the hemisphere and the other reflecting from the plane, will have a phasedifference of =k(2d)- ( at reflection off the plane). Maximum, constructive interference will occur at42dm, so when d=1/2(m+1/2). This result translated to the distance x (because x lies in the plane we are watching/projecting) yields 1/2(m+1/2)=R-(R2-x2)1/2, giving x={R(m+1/2)-1/42(m+1/2)2}1/2. And R being much larger than  will give x={R(m+1/2)}1/2. First conclusion is that x is proportional to the squareroot of wavelength. So a higher wavelength yields a higher x: blue is on the inside, red on the outside. Second, the proportionality in (m+1/2)1/2 shows that the sequence of the bright fringes follows a square root: moving away from the centre the fringes come closer and closer together. Newton's rings (2)    
```{figure} figures/figure_3.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_3.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
 Finally, we calculated for a number of m-values x. Figure 3 shows the calculated results (10-5; R=1m) for the red, green and blue line of Hg-light. In this way it is clear that the colours observed are the result of different combinations. Only near the centre a rainbow pattern appears. It is not difficult now to show that for destructive interference we get x=(Rm)1/2. This yields that the centre of the reflected Newton's rings must be a dark spot. Figure3 shows the minima as dashed lines for red, green and blue.   
  
## Remarks   
 
 *  Using filters, it is possible to show a monochromatic interference pattern. Especially in the yellow line of Hg the pattern is bright. 
 *  In the projected reflection image the central area should be dark. But usually there is a coloured spot instead. This is probably due to trapped dirt in the contact area between the two surfaces.
   
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Giancoli, D.G., Physics for scientists and engineers with modern physics, pag. 878-879 
 *  Hecht, Eugene, Optics, pag. 398-399 
 *  Young, H.D. and Freeman, R.A., University Physics, pag. 1152-1153
 