# 1E10.02 
  # Galilean Cart 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show and discuss an example of Galilean transformations    
  
## Subjects   
 1E10 (Moving Reference Frames)   
  
## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
      
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  Two carts, easy rolling and able to carry a human being; construction as shown in Diagram. 
 *  Large funnel (outlet reduced to 4mm), suspended by three cords. 
 *  Clamping material to support the funnel-pendulum. 
 *  1kg of salt. 
 *  Broom.
     
  
## Presentation   
 
 *  One person sits on the cart and fills the funnel with salt, keeping the outlet closed with a finger and gives the funnel-pendulum a deflection into the x'-direction. The demonstrator moves the cart with constant speed along the front of the lecture hall (y-direction). As soon as the speed is constant, the person on the cart makes the pendulum go. A salt-track is written on the floor of the lecturehall (see Figure2). This track shows the recording of the movement of the swinging funnel in the x-y plane.    
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
 Figure 2 
 *  The same demonstration is performed but now with the funnel-pendulum swinging into the y'-direction. A second salt-track appears on the floor (see Figure1). Again the salttrack shows the recording of the movement of the swinging funnel in the x-y plane. The results are discussed.
    
  
## Explanation   
 
 *  The pendulum moves in the x'-y'-z'-frame according to: ()'sinxAtwj=+; y'=0; z'=0. The writing on the ground in salt is in the x-y-z-frame. The x'-y'-z'-frame moves with a speed V into the y-direction., so a point measured in the x'-y'-z'-frame will have an y-coordinate: yVt=. (see Figure2). 
 *  When the pendulum swings into the y'-direction, the movements in the x-y-z-frame will be: ()sinyVtAtwj=++; x=0 and z=0 (see Fig
ure1).   
  
## Remarks   
 
 *  As Figure1 makes clear, the difference between much - and little salt is more pronounced when y=Vt is steeper; that is at higher speeds
 of the cart.   
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 173-174 
 *  McComb,W.D., Dynamics and Relativity, pag. 24-25
     