
```{figure} /figures/busy.png
---
width: 35%
align: right
```
# 1L20.02 
  # Kepler's Third Law 
    
  
## Aim   
 To show empirically that Kepler’s third law is true.    
  
## Subjects   
 1L20 (Orbits) 8A10 (Solar System Mechanics)   
  
## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
     
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  Graph on overhead sheet, T=f(a), T  and a both scaled logarithmically. 
 *  Table with data of the planetary system (see Sources). Kepler’s third law
     
  
## Presentation   
 The graph is projected by means of an overhead sheet. The relationship with the table of planetary data is elucidated. Clearly can be observed that the data fit on a straight line in such a double logarithmic graph. The slope of this line (p/q) equals 1.5. This is the relationship of the powers in Kepler's third law: . 23Ta∝  
  
## Explanation   
 Kepler's third law states . Taking logarithms on both sides, we can also 2.Tconsta=3write:  and: 2loglogTc=.3logonsta+3122loglog.logTconsta=+. So when T and a are graphed logarithmically (with x– and y-decades equally spaced), we see a line whose slope (32) is the power-relationship in the original function.   
  
## Simulations   
 On the internet you can find many simulations that are appropriate. For instance on: www.walter-fendt.de , www.physics.sjsu.edu/Tomley/demos.htm and www.astro.unl.edu/naap/pos/animations/kepler.swf .   
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, edition 1998, pag. 106-107 and 741  (planetary data). 
 *  BINAS tabellenboek, vijfde druk, tabel 31. 
 *  McComb, W.D., Dynamics and Relativity, edition 1999, pag. 72-74. 
 *  Roest, R., Inleiding Mechanica, vijfde druk, pag. 257-258. 
 *  Stewart, J, Calculus, edition 1999, pag. 867.
  