# 1E20.05 
  # Coriolis (3) 
 Coriolis (3)   
  
## Aim   
 To elucidate the direction of the coriolis force on our rotating earth.    
  
## Subjects   
 1E20 (Rotating Reference Frames) 1E30 (Coriolis Effect)   
  
## Diagram   
    
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
     
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  Globe. 
 *  Flexible straw (v and w in DiagramB). 
 *  Toothpick (F in DiagramB). Coriolis (3)
    
  
## Presentation   
 On the globe our local position is indicated by sticking a small puppet at our coordinates (Delft, 52o Nothern latitude; see DiagramA). On the globe the sense of rotation is indicated by arrows stuck to the equator. This sense of rotation is also indicated by the wo-vector stuck into the Northpole. The flexible straw is used as a resource to indicate simultaneously the direction of wo and the direction into which an object is moving (velocity v). The long arm of the straw is used to indicate the direction of wo and the short arm used to indicate the direction of v. Applying the corkscrew rule (()2corFmvw=-·(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)), the direction of Fcor is indicated by sticking the toothpick into the elbow of the flexible straw (see Diagram). The advantage of using the flexible straw is that easily the angle between wo and v can be changed; the toothpick can be easily shifted in and out the elbow when the corkscrew rule indicates that the direction of Fcor is different (see Figure1).     
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
   
  
## Remarks   
 
 *  On the Southern hemisphere this straw-toothpick vector model can be used when you keep wo pointing upwards, meaning that you have to keep the model a distance away from the globe.
   
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Mansfield, M and O'Sullivan, C., Understanding physics, pag. 182 
 *  McComb,W.D., Dynamics and Relativity, pag. 137-145 
 *  Roest, R., Inleiding Mechanica, pag. 197-202; 205-210 
 *  Giancoli, D.G., Physics for scientists and engineers with modern physics, pag. 291-292
  