# 1K20.10 
  # Rolling Up-and-Down, Again and Again 
    
  
## Aim   
 Determining the coefficient of rolling friction and to give an impression how low the coefficient of rolling friction is.    
  
## Subjects   
 1K20 (Friction)   
  
## Diagram   
   
```{figure} figures/figure_0.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_0.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
      
  
## Equipment   
 
 *  U-shaped railtrack 
 *  Metal ball
     
  
## Presentation   
 Release the ball and it will roll down the track, climb the other track, and so on. But gradually the distance it rolls reduces (due to rolling friction). After n runs the coefficient of rolling friction can be determined by measuring the distance the ball travels upward in the n-th run.    
  
## Explanation   
 The potential energy of the ball equals (see Figure 1 and 2)    
```{figure} figures/figure_1.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_1.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
     
  
## Presentation   
 Release the ball and it will roll down the track, climb the other track, and so on. But gradually the distance it rolls reduces (due to rolling friction). After n runs the coefficient of rolling friction can be determined by measuring the distance the ball travels upward in the n-th run.    
  
## Explanation   
 The potential energy of the ball equals (see Figure 1 and 2)   Figure 1  ()()000sinpUmgsFsa== Reacting the other side (1): ()()()0101ppfUUFss-=+ So: ()()0101fFssFss-=+ 100011ffffFFFFssssbFFFF--===++ Rolling back (s1) and up (s2) again: s2=s1.b=s0.b2 The coefficient of friction (m) is by definition Ff/FN.  In this case (see Figure 2): tanfFFma=.    
```{figure} figures/figure_2.png  
---  
width: 50%  
name: figures/figure_2.png  
---  
caption  
``` 
 So the coefficient of friction can be determined by measuring s0, s2 and a and using the formulas above.    
  
## Sources   
 
 *  Jordens, H.
  